Tutorial: How to calculate new vs returning users (#5858)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/calculating-new-returning-users.md

---

> title: How to calculate new and returning users in PostHog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: How to track new and returning users in PostHog
```

People are more likely to search for how to track than how to calculate. Should aid discovery.

date: 2023-04-25
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-18.png
tags: ["trends", "cohorts"]
---

Understanding user growth is critical to a successful product. A lack of new users or many users failing to return is a bad sign. This tutorial goes over the different ways to calculate new and returning users in PostHog, as well as insights you can create using those calculations.

> **How does Google Analytics calculate new vs returning users?** When you first visit a site, Google Analytics generates a client ID for your device and sets it in your cookies. GA uses this client ID cookie to calculate if a user is new (didn’t have cookie set) or returning (had cookie set). This, like any tracking, isn’t 100% accurate.

## Calculating new users

There are multiple ways to calculate new users in PostHog depending on your situation and need.

### Completed event for the first time cohort

> The first and easiest is creating a cohort where the users completed an event (such as pageviews, identify, custom sign up) for the first time. To set this up, go to the cohort tab, click new cohort, enter a title and description, then choose "completed an event for the first time" with your event and recency. 

Reviewer 2: > (such as pageviews, identify, custom sign up)

Not sure I understand what is identify or custom sign up. Perhaps worth hyperlinking?

![New users](../images/tutorials/calculating-new-returning-users//new.png)

You can then use this cohort of new users for further analysis.

> **Note:** since this is a behavioral cohort (based on events), this cohort won’t work with feature flags.

> ### First time event tracker

Reviewer 2: When would I want to use this instead of "Completed event for the first time cohort". Perhaps worth explaining?

Author: For use without cohorts, added

You can set up and use the [first time event tracker app](/docs/apps/first-time-event-tracker) to add a property on users to say when they completed the pageview, identify, or custom event for the first time.

To set it up, search for "First Time Event Tracker" in your PostHog instance, set the event you want to track in the configuration (like `$pageview`) and enable the app. 

![First time event tracker](../images/tutorials/calculating-new-returning-users/first.png)

> You can then filter for events where `is_first_event_user` is `true` recently to get new users for analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can then filter for recent events where `is_first_event_user` is `true` to get new users for analysis.
```

### Manually set user property

If neither of these works for you, you can set up a user property manually in a custom event. 

For example, when a user first uses your API, set their creation date in their user properties. To do this, you can capture an event at the same time, and use the `$set_once` property like this:

```python
posthog.capture(
    '<ph_project_api_key>',
    event='new user created',
    properties={ '$set_once': { 'created_at': '2023-04-24T22:02:02' } }
)
```

> This is especially useful for projects with many custom events, on the backend, not using autocapture, or not using `posthog-js`. 

Reviewer 2: Reads a bit weird. My suggestion may be too verbose
```suggestion
This is especially useful for projects that either have, with many custom events, are on the backend, are not using autocapture, or are not using `posthog-js`. 
```

## Calculating returning users

> Unlike new users, there is one way to calculate returning users. It is identifying users who aren’t new but completed an event recently. To create a cohort for this, you can use the new user cohort as an anti-cohort (choose "Not in cohort"), and include another criteria for completing an event recently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike new users, there is only one way to calculate returning users: by identifying users who aren’t new and have completed an event recently. To create a cohort for this, you can use the new user cohort as an anti-cohort (choose "Not in cohort"), and include another criteria for completing an event recently.
```

![Returning users](../images/tutorials/calculating-new-returning-users/returning.png)

> If you created a `created_at` user property, you can also filter for users who weren’t created recently but completed the event. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if you created a `created_at` user property, you can also filter for users who weren’t created recently but completed the event. 
```

(also, this seems to apply that are two ways and not one way?)

Author: Good point

### Using a retention insight

> If you care specifically about returning users, you can set up a retention insight. This shows the number of users who complete an event, then return to complete another event at a later date. You can customize the event and timeframe depending on what you care about.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you care specifically about returning users, you can set up a retention insight. This shows the number of users who complete an event and then return to complete another event at a later date. You can customize the event and timeframe depending on what you care about.
```

For example, an 8 week pageview retention graph looks like this:

![Retention](../images/tutorials/calculating-new-returning-users/retention.png)

You can learn more about retention in our [guide to churn analysis](/blog/customer-churn-analysis-guide).

## Comparing new vs returning users

With both new and returning users calculated, you can compare them for analysis. To do this, create an insight with two unique user trends: one filtered by the new user cohort, the other filtered by the returning user cohort. 

![Versus](../images/tutorials/calculating-new-returning-users/versus.png)

> This gives you a trend similar to Google Analytics’ new vs returning visitors graph. You can also use these cohort filters for further analysis like comparing [session duration](/tutorials/session-metrics), feature usage, or even funnel conversion.

Reviewer 2: Are many of our users familiar with Google Analytics graph? Is it worth mentioning?

Author: I think so
